We will start with a very simple
classification technique called k-Nearest
Neighbors.
After this video, you will be able
to describe how kNN is used for
classification.
Discuss the assumption behind kNN and
explain what the k stands for in kNN.
kNN stands for k-Nearest Neighbors.
This is one of the simplest techniques
to build a classification model.
The basic idea is to classify
a sample based on its neighbors.
So when you get a new sample as shown by
the green circle in the figure, the class
label for that sample is determined by
looking at the labels of its neighbors.
KNN relies on the notion
of the so-called duck test.
That is if it looks like a duck,
swims like a duck and quacks like a duck,
then it probably is a duck.
In the classification context,
this means that samples with similar input
values likely belong to the same class.
So, samples with similar input values
should be labeled with the same
target label.
This means that classification
of a sample is dependent
on the target labels of
the neighboring points.
In more detail then,
this is how kNN works.
Given a new sample, look for
the samples in the training data
that are closest to the new sample.
These are the neighbors.
Use the labels of this neighboring points
to determine the label for the new sample.
This figure illustrate how kNN works.
The problem here is to determine if
a sample should be classified as
a blue square or red triangle.
The green circle is the new sample.
To determine a class label for this new
sample, look at its closest neighbors.
These neighbors are the samples
within the dashed circle.
Two blue squares and one red triangle.
The class labels of the neighboring
samples determine the label for
the new sample.
The value of k determines the number
of nearest neighbor to consider.
So if k equals 1,
then only the closest neighbor is examined
to determine the class of the new
sample as shown in the left figure.
If k equals 2,
then the 2 nearest neighbors are
considered as seen in the middle figure.
If k equal 3, then the 3 nearest
neighbors are considered as
in the right figure and so on.
If k equal 1 and only 1 neighbor is used,
then the label for
the new sample is simpler
the label of the neighbor.
This is shown in the left figure.
The label of the new sample is then A,
since that is the label of
its one nearest neighbor.
When multiple neighbors are considered,
then a voting scheme is used.
Majority of vote is commonly used,
so the label associated with
the majority of the neighbors is
used as the label of the new sample.
This is what we see in the right figure.
With k equals 3,
3 nearest neighbors are considered.
With two neighbors labeled as A and
one as B,
the majority of vote determines that
the new sample should be labeled as A.
In case of a tie which could be
possible if the value of k is even,
then some tight breaking rule is needed.
For example, the label of
the closer neighbor is used or
the label is chosen randomly
among the neighbors.
This is seen in the middle figure.
With two nearest neighbors and each with
a different class label, the label for
the new sample is randomly
chosen here to be B.
With kNN, some measure of similarity
is needed to determine how
close two samples are together.
This is necessary to determine which
samples are the nearest neighbors.
Distance measures such as
distance are commonly used.
Other distance measures that can be used,
include Manhattan and hemming distance.
To summarize, kNN is a very
simple classification technique.
Note that there is no
separate training phase.
There is no separate part where a model is
constructed and its parameter is adjusted.
This is unlike most other
classification algorithms.
KNN can generate complex
decision boundaries allowing for
complex classification
decisions to be made.
It can be susceptible to noise,however,
because classification decisions
are made using only information about
a few neighboring points
instead of the entire dataset.
KNN can be slow, however, since
the distance between a new sample and
all sample points in the data must
be calculated in order to determine
the k-Nearest Neighbors.